# Kevin

# Designing a compostable book

I was approached by a duo of Design Leadership MA students to realize their concept for a plantable workbook about managing grief. It quickly revealed itself to be much more complicated of a project as originally thought—it COULD just be be regular paper with a generic seed-paper cover, but it could also work through many relevant considerations: does regular paper have bleaching elements that would be toxic to soil? Would the seeded paper introduce an invasive species? Could the amount of content be reduced without losing its effect? To the extent possible, I addressed each of these concerns to arrive at a well-considered end result.

The first step was editing down the lengthy amount of written content—a good amount of it was unnecessary to the piece as a whole, and for an object that needs to fully decompose, less material is optimal. The original makers of the book were totally open to having the book edited, which helped a lot. Once I removed content that wasn’t necessary to the overall theme of the book (managing grief in a healthy and productive way), I began researching how paper decomposes. This book—‘Root and Branch’—is intended to be planted after working through it, and will grow something new in return. A beautiful metaphor. However, for that to happen successfully, the paper has to be just right.

For a standard piece of printing paper, a mechanical bleaching process (called ‘brightening’) takes place to produce the crisp, white sheet we all expect. This is mostly brought to fruition by mixing the paper pulp with hydrogen peroxide and sodium dithionite. These two compounds together prohibit the makeup of the pulp from absorbing visible light, keeping the paper bright for longer. Mechanical bleaching is better than it used to be—conventionally, chlorine was used, which is efficient. But produced with a bright piece of paper were chlorinated dioxins which are recognized as a ‘persistent environmental pollutant’ and cancerous to humans.

The best option ended up being newsprint, because it travels through the least amount of mechanical processes AND remains lightweight. Together, this allows the paper to decompose as effectively as possible. Considering the ink was another issue.
